Needing all hands on deck for their ambitious pilgrimages, there are many accounts of women taking part in the crusades. Some women even rode into battle dressed in men’s clothes, and took part in the violence.
The first crusade was fought between 30,000 soldiers from Europe (including commoners, peasants, and knights) and the Seljuk Turks, who had taken control of The Holy Land from the Arabs.
The Children's Crusade took place in 1212. A French child and a German child led tens of thousands of children to The Holy Land. They never made it to their destination.
The Sixth Crusade in 1228, led by Emperor Frederick II, was the first official crusade to not have a papal blessing, as the emperor was excommunicated by Pope Gregory IX. The Pope would later lift his excommunication after Frederick fought and negotiated his way to obtaining Jerusalem, Bethlehem, and Nazareth, thus naming himself King of Jerusalem.
The crusades led to a budding trade relationship between the city-states of Genoa and Venice and the Islamic world across the Mediterranean, which would lead to the growth of these city-states, setting the foundations for the development of modern capitalism through mercantilism.
Through the crusades, Islamic and Christian cultures mixed. This interaction precipitated the Renaissance, and likely led to the reintroduction of ancient Greek and Roman texts to Europe.
During the crusades, many fictional accounts sprouted up, and much of our understanding today of the crusades derives from historical novels based on the crusades.
During the crusades, the Islamic world referred to the crusaders as the “Franks,” and considered them a form of barbarians due to their violence. They now refer to the crusades as “campaigns of the cross.”
While the crusades led to a clear separation between Christianity and Islam and Orthodox Christianity, it also led to a separation with Jews. The crusades saw a persecution of Jews across Europe and in Jerusalem, as crusaders murdered thousands along their pilgrimage.
During and continuing on after the failure of the Second Crusade, there were attempts by crusaders to go north and bring the Baltic tribes under Catholic control.
Overall, there were nine major crusades, all involving Christian pilgrims who attempted to liberate the Holy Land from Islamic control in one way or another. There is no way of knowing exactly how many died as a result of the conflict, but estimates range from one million all the way to three million people.
The original crusades were instead referred to as “iter” or “peregrinatio” meaning journey and pilgrimage, respectively.
The origins of the crusades lay in the conquering of the Holy Land by the Muslim Seljuk Empire. After their defeat of the Byzantines, powerful Christians in Western Europe decided to launch the First Crusade to reclaim the land.
Perhaps the greatest impact the crusades actually had was on the perception of western Christians by the Orthodox Christians and Muslims, as the brutality of western Christians was shocking. The crusaders raped and pillaged, massacred thousands, burnt people alive, and desecrated religious monuments.
Crusades had to be sanctioned by the pope, and they were officially used to conduct battle on groups deemed to be enemies of Christendom.
There was allegedly a group of crusaders during the First Crusade known as the Tafurs. These monstrous men were said to always be covered in hideous sores, and they were known to take the bodies of their freshly slain enemies and eat them. They were said to be so poor that they had to subsist on grasses and roots, and so when they could they would cook up dead enemies after battle.
The motivation for crusades wasn’t simply religious; they were often conducted for political and economic reasons. Popes often saw crusades as ways to extend their imperial reach, and knights a way to distinguish themselves outside of the chaotic density of western Europe.
Crusaders were often promised absolution from purgatory in the afterlife. They were also usually landless nobles or peasants who were in search of creating a future for themselves by seizing land from their Muslim enemies.
The People’s Crusade of 1096 was led by Peter the Hermit, and was comprised of incompetent peasants who were fleeing drought, famine, and disease in their homeland. These crusaders would be responsible for the brutal slaying of an estimated one-fourth to one-third of the Jewish population along the Rhine river in France and Germany.
In 1099, the crusaders succeeded in taking Jerusalem, and founded the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, which would last until 1187, when it was retaken by Muslim forces. This led to the launching of the Third Crusade, which was an effort to retake Jerusalem, which ultimately failed.
In the year 1095, Pope Urban II proclaimed the First Crusade. The ideology adopted by crusaders was that Christianity was a universal salvation that should be adopted by all. If people did not convert, then they could be murdered in the name of God.
The Third Crusade was led by the enduring King Richard the Lionheart of England. Famous for his reputation as a warrior, Richard was unable to retake Jerusalem, but was able to negotiate an agreement with his rival Sultan Saladin, allowing Christians to pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
The original crusades were meant to support the Byzantine empire from the Seljuks, but by the time the Fourth Crusades in the early 13th century came around, the tide had turned. While on their way to Jerusalem in 1204, the crusaders were convinced by powerful Venetian elites to sack Constantinople, capital of the Christian Byzantines, which they did in bloody fashion. They ultimately never made it even close to Jerusalem.
Thanks to centuries of war and further fragmentation of the region, the ruins left by the Crusades helped to pave the way for the Mongol invasion in the mid 13th century. The Christians almost sowed the seeds of their own destruction, as the Mongols would advance their Empire as far as the outskirts of Vienna, almost being able to take root in central Europe before finally being defeated.
Knighthoods entered into the monastic sphere with the acceptance of the Hospitallers into the crusades. After setting up shop in Rhodes, they would migrate to Malta and police the Mediterranean until their expulsion by Napoleon in 1798. In 1834, they moved to Rome and became the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, continuing their operations in the form of humanitarian aid throughout the world, which continues today.
Formed between the second and third crusades were the Knights of Templar. Famous today for their secrecy and wealth, the Knights of Templar were among the most skilled fighters of the crusades, and they built a vast, innovative economic infrastructure that would be a precursor to early banking.
The word “crusade” wasn’t used when they began; it only came into use in its current meaning in the late 18th century. The root of the word comes from “croisade,” which was first used in the 16th century, and is itself derived from the Latin word “cruciata,” meaning to mark with a cross.